This article contains information about the teams agreed upon conventions and workflows regarding all things configuration in dialogporten. 

The team recognize three types of configuration, which should all be handled differently:
1. Normal configuration
2. Autogenerated secrets
3. External secrets

Table of Contents:
- [1. Discoverability](#1-discoverability)
- [2. Normal configuration](#2-normal-configuration)
  - [2.1. Word of caution](#21-word-of-caution)
  - [2.2. How to](#22-how-to)
  - [2.3. CI/CD](#23-cicd)
- [3. Autogenerated secrets](#3-autogenerated-secrets)
  - [3.1. How to](#31-how-to)
- [4. External secrets](#4-external-secrets)
  - [4.1. Naming convention](#41-naming-convention)
  - [4.2. How to](#42-how-to)

# 1. Discoverability
To aid in the discoverability of available configuration, the complete set of configuration keys, both secrets and non secrets, that is declared in the domain should be present in `appsettings.Development.json`. For [normal configuration](#2-normal-configuration), use a sensible local development default. For secrets use `"TODO: Add to local secrets"` or some other invalid, yet human readable useful value. Example:
```json
// appsettings.Development.json
{
  "Infrastructure": {
    // Secret that should not be exposed
    "DialogDbConnectionString": "TODO: Add to local secrets", 
    "Altinn": {
      // Non secret with a sensible value for local development
      "BaseUri": "https://platform.tt02.altinn.no/"
    }
  }
}
```

# 2. Normal configuration
By "normal configuration" we mean non secrets or configuration that that does not pose a security risk when shared externally. This type of configuration can live directly in the git repository, which gives us benefits like version controlled configuration, and a single point of truth for each environments configuration. 

Each runtime defines an `appsettings.{Environment}.json` for each target environment. This file should contain environment specific configuration. In addition to the specific environment configuration files there should also exist a `appsettings.json`. This file should contain cross cutting environment configuration. The `appsettings.{Environment}.json` configuration takes presence over the `appsettings.json` configuration, meaning - if the configuration key `foo` exists in both files, the value from `appsettings.{Environment}.json` is used. 

## 2.1. Word of caution
Due to the implicit and cross cutting nature of `appsettings.json` **it should be used cautiously.** It's often better to let a runtime fail hard and crash due to no configuration, than using the wrong configuration value silently. Say for example that a `.well-known` authentication service endpoint is configured in `appsettings.json` because the same endpoint is used in `Development`, `Test` and `Stage`. However, the developer forgets to add it to `appsettings.Production.json` and thereby not overriding it for the `Production` environment. Thus `Production` is now using the same `.well-known` endpoint as the rest of the environments and thereby open to non-production tokens. It should produce a **big fat red critical error**, but instead it continues on like everything is fine. Therefore the `.well-known` endpoint, and many other configurations, does **not belong** in `appsettings.json`. **The absence of a configuration is often better than the wrong one silently working.** 

## 2.2. How to
Adding, removing or updating non secret configuration is as simple as modifying `appsettings.json` for cross cutting configuration or `appsettings.[Environment].json` for environment specific configuration. **Use caution when adding configuration to `appsettings.json`**, see [2.1. Word of caution](#21-word-of-caution). When adding a required configuration to `appsettings.[Environment].json`, remember to add the configuration for all the environment specific json files. GitHub actions will do the rest when merging to main.

## 2.3. CI/CD
When a pull request containing configuration changes is merged with main, one of two things happens:
- If there are configuration changes **and not** changes to the `src` folder, a GitHub action workflow kicks in pushing **only** the configuration to Azure App Configuration and updating the sentinel value. 
- If there are changes to the `src` folder regardless of configuration changes, the normal build-deploy GitHub action workflow will kick in. It in turn will reference the above workflow pushing changes to Azure App Configuration and updating the sentinel value **only** when there are configuration changes. We can use the [paths-filter](https://github.com/dorny/paths-filter) to run the config action depending on if there are changes to the configuration. 

Each runtime / presentation layer adds its own configuration keys to azure app configuration through `appsettings.json` and `appsettings.[Environment].json` with a runtime tag, indicating which runtime that owns that specific configuration value. 

# 3. Autogenerated secrets
Autogenerated secrets are secrets that is generated and used by the IaC when creating resources in Azure. When a resource which require a password is generated, the IaC bootstrap script will create a new key value pair with the name of the password as its key, and the actual password as its value. The IaC then checks if the environments key vault has a secret with the same name. If it does, the autogenerated password will be discarded and the "cached" password will be used. If not, it will add/"cache" the autogenerated password to the key vault and use it when creating the resource. 

An example of a autogenerated secret could be PostgreSql admin password.

The auto generated secrets will not have to be handled or known by anyone other than the specific environments azure key vault. In addition, new environments does not require human intervention to create and store these kinds of secrets. 

## 3.1. How to
**TODO: Kan vi bruke miljøets KV direkte som cache?**

Modifying autogenerated secrets is a multi step process. 

To add and use the new secret:
1. Generate the secret in gh action, like we do for the postgresql password:
    ```yml
    ...
      - name: Generate postgresql password
        id: pwd-generator
        shell: pwsh
        run: |
          Import-module "./.github/tools/pwdGenerator.ps1" -Force
          $password = (GeneratePassword -length 30).Password
          echo "::add-mask::$password"
          echo "::set-output name=postgresqlPassword::$password"
    ...
    ```
    Pass the password as parameter to the deployment step. In the case of the posgresql password, this password will be different every time the IaC runs which is why we don't want to use this value directly. The bicep module **postgreSql** will add `postgresqlPassword` to the specific environments key vault if it does not already exist.
2. Use the secret by fetching it from the environment key vault `envKeyVault.getSecret('postgresqlPassword')`.

Removing or modifying autogenerated secrets is not supported through IaC.

# 4. External secrets
External secrets are secrets that require human intervention to configure and must be known ahead of time, before the IaC runs. This could be a 3rd party api key or certificates. 

To be able to support both external secrets and an IaC that can spin up a brand new environment on the fly, we've introduced a convention based "source key vault". The source key vault should exclusively contain external secrets and must exist before the IaC runs as it depends on it. The source key vault could be used by multiple environments. 

## 4.1. Naming convention
When the IaC runs, it copies specific secrets from the source to the deployments target environment key vault based on the following naming convention:

| **Convention type** | **Source key vault**                     | **Environment key vault** |
|---------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| **Wildcard**        | dialogporten--any--[SecretKey]             | [SecretKey]               |
| **Environment**     | dialogporten--[Environment]--[SecretKey] | [SecretKey]               |

There are two conventions, one that targets a specific environment, and one "any" that targets all environments that the source is connected to through IaC. The environment specific convention takes precedence over the "any" convention. For example, say we are running an IaC that targets the `Stage` environment with the following keys in the source key vault:

| **Source key vault**          | **Stage key vault** | **IsCopied** | **Description**                                         |
|-------------------------------|---------------------|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| dialogporten--any--foo          |                     | false        | Environment specific "foo" convention takes precedence. |
| dialogporten--any--bar          | bar                 | true         | No environment specific "bar" exists.                   |
| dialogporten--Stage--foo      | foo                 | true         | Overrides the "any" convention for "foo".            |
| dialogporten--Test--bar       |                     | false        | Targets another environment.                            |
| dialogporten--Stage--foo--bar | foo--bar            | true         | Supports hierarchical values with `--` as separator.    |
| iDoNotFollowTheConvention     |                     | false        | Is ignored as it does not follow any convention.        |

## 4.2. How to
Instruct your friendly secrets manager to modify the desired key value pair in the source key vault before merging your pull request to the main branch. 